we considered the current genetic structure of the MCH and explored its potential impact on long-term population trends. To predict changes in genetic differentiation (FST) between the Mulchatna groups over time, we applied a simplified genetic drift model derived from a combination of existing estimators of divergence (Wright 1931, 1951; Holsinger and Weir 2009). Our model reflects the cumulative effect of genetic drift and gene flow on divergence using the equation
FST(t) =1- (1- FST(0)) × e-t(2NE(1-m))

where FST​(t) is the expected genetic differentiation at generation t, capturing how groups diverge genetically over time. The initial observed genetic differentiation, FST(0), serves as the baseline of current population divergence, t denotes the time in generations, NE is the effective population size, and m represents the proportion of migrants contributing to the gene pool each generation. In this model, smaller NE values amplify genetic drift while larger NE values buffer against population divergence (Wright 1931; Lande 1988; Reed et al. 2003). The initial term ensures the equation starts at the observed FST(0) when t = 0 and the exponential decay term represents the rate at which genetic drift accumulates differentiation at a slowing rate. Exponential decay is appropriate in this context because genetic drift leads to a diminishing rate of change in genetic differentiation as populations approach their maximum possible differentiation (FST = 1) (Wright 1931; Holsinger and Weir 2009). The relationship between effective population size NE and genetic drift is inverse, with smaller NE values leading to faster genetic drift because fewer individuals contribute to the gene pool, making random changes in allele frequencies more pronounced (Star and Spencer 2013). By including these parameters, the equation links NE, generation time, and initial connectivity to predictions of genetic differentiation. 

Given the observed demographic structure of the MCH and total census size of 13,000 individuals, we assigned NE sizes based on current MCH group distributions (Barten and Watine 2020), with 50% of individuals assigned to the western calving grounds, 35% to the east, and 15% to the central group. To account for the influence of genetic drift on genetic differentiation, we estimated the pairwise NE between groups using the harmonic mean, as it gives greater weight to smaller populations, which are more affected by genetic drift than larger populations. This ensured that NE represented each group's contribution to the overall effective population (Kimura and Ohta 1969). Pairwise harmonic means were calculated for each group comparison (west-east, west-central, and east-central)under two scenarios: a small NE scenario (10% of census size) and a large NE scenario (30% of census size) based on the literature estimates of census to effective population size (Sæther et al. 2009). We used the equation
NE=2kNC1NC2 kNC1 + kNC2 

where NC1 and NC2 were the census size of populations 1 and 2, respectively and k was a scaling factor (0.1 or 0.3). These estimates were then used to model changes in FST​ over time, capturing how varying population sizes influence the rate of divergence. Predictions were made for all pairwise comparisons for 50 generations.  
